osi
P D N T S P A

physical layer:jo hume physically dikhti hai like cable and switch,switch converts data into Os and 1s

Data link layer: transfer packet(data),data link layer facilitates data transfer between two devices on the SAME network.

The network layer:The network layer is responsible for facilitating data transfer between two different networks(routing)

The transport layer:responsible for end-to-end communication between the two devices
The transport layer is also responsible for flow control(ensure fast connection) and error control(check if data is comp or not,if not firse bhejo).


The session layer:The session layer ensures that the session stays open long enough to transfer all the data being exchanged, and then promptly closes the session in order to avoid wasting resources
Also has check points if 10 gb file me after each 1 gb there is checkpoint so that if something goes wrong we can roll back


The presentation layer:The presentation layer is responsible for translation(maybe 2 device using diff encoding toh trnaslate krti hai so can syntax app layer samj jaae),
 encryption(device comm on encrypted conn toh sender ka data encode and decode the encription when reciver ke pass gya so that reciver ko samje kya bheja tha),
 and compression of data(This helps improve the speed and efficiency of communication by minimizing the amount of data that will be transferred.).

The application layer:This is the only layer that directly interacts with data from the user.

TCP and UDP

TCP:When you request a web page in your browser, your computer sends TCP packets to the web server’s address, asking it to send the web page back to you.
TCP is all about reliability—packets sent with TCP are tracked so no data is lost or corrupted in transit.it orders packets by numbering them and it error-checks by having the recipient send a response back to the sender saying that it has received the message

UDP:UDP, packets are just sent to the recipient. The sender doesn’t wait to make sure the recipient received the packet—it just continues sending the next packets. If the recipient misses a few UDP packets here and there, they are just lost—the sender won’t resend them. 
very quick for ex:streaming game(fast honna chiye kuch bits miss ho jaae chalega)


PAN (Personal Area Network):Let devices connect and communicate over the range of a person. E.g. connecting Bluetooth devices.

LAN (Local Area Network):It is a privately owned network that operates within and nearby a single building like a home, office, or factory


MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)	It connects and covers the whole city. E.g. TV Cable connection over the city

WAN (Wide Area Network)	It spans a large geographical area, often a country or continent. The Internet is the largest WAN


GAN (Global Area Network)	It is also known as the Internet which connects the globe using satellites. The Internet is also called the Network of WANs.



TOPOLOGY

Bus Topology:(line line)
Star Topology:(ek se aneek)
Ring Topology:(sab ek circle me)
 
Tree Topology:(bst types)
Hybrid(BEST):sabka best feautre add krke

Ipv4:32 bit limited number 0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.254
Ipv6:128 bit unlimited number cant run on purani website

Ports:
HTTP 80
HTTPS:443
SMTP(simple mail) 25,use for email,use tcp
DHCP(dynamic host config protocol):67(used to auto-configure devices on IP networks enabling them to use the TCP and UDP-based protocols.)

ARP is Address Resolution Protocol. It is a network-level protocol used to convert the logical address(IP) to Physical add(MAC)


MAC address:Media Access Control Address
48 bit diff for every pc(embedded with NIC),called physical address


Subnet:A subnet is a network inside a network achieved by the process called subnetting which helps divide a network into subnets. It is used for getting a higher routing efficiency and enhances the security of the network. It reduces the time to extract the host address from the routing table.









